# Transcriptional_Decomposition

The activity of a gene is not independent of its physical location on the DNA, and it is often co-expressed with the surrounding genes in its local neighbourhood. Previous, the Transcriptional Decomposition approach sought to separate gene expression into two components - a position dependent component and a position independent component [1]. These components were shown to have interesting biological interpretations - the first ("dependent") as a readout for co-regulatory mechanisms affecting genomic neighbourhoods, and the second ("independent") as a gene-specific readout. By separating expression into these components, one can therefore seek to accurately identify domains of co-regulated genes and the underlying mechanisms affecting them [2]. The current approach suffers from two main problems: first, it requires too much RAM memory, so it is usually not able to decompose an entire arm of a chromosome (or an entire chromosome); and second, it relies on equally spaced genomic bins, which might not always be the best units to use (for example, in RNAseq or scRNAseq). Furthermore, Transcriptional Decomposition has never been adapted for the study of single cells (scRNA-seq), so there is much potential for interesting biological results, such studying the coordination of co-regulated domains accross cell populations.

In this package, I will attempt to solve the above issues, in order to create a gene expression decomposition tool that is more stable and efficient than the current approach, and thereby suitable for the analysis of scRNAseq data. This project will involve substantial methodological developments, in particular adapting the current Bayesian Hierarchical modelling approach to use memory more efficiently. Additionally, to make the change of unit from genomic bins to genes or chromatin accessible regions, a new model that takes into account the distances between units will need to be considered to replace the current model of the dependent component.


Bibliography

[1] 	S. Rennie, M. Dalby, L. van Duin and R. Andersson, "Transcriptional decomposition reveals active chromatin architectures and cell specific regulatory interactions," Nature Comunications, vol. 9, no. 487, pp. 1-16, 2018. 
[2] 	L. van Duin, R. Krautz, S. Rennie and R. Andersson, "Transcription factor expression is the main determinant of variability in gene co-activity," 2022. 
